docs/wildcards.md, before:

---
title: Wildcards in FFmate – Dynamic File Naming and Task Scripting
description: Learn how to use wildcards in FFmate to generate dynamic file and folder names, automate output paths, insert timestamps, and adapt processing logic based on task sources like the API or watchfolders
---


# Wildcards

FFmate supports wildcards to help you generate file and directory names dynamically—no manual renaming required.  
Instead of hardcoding output paths for each task, you can use smart placeholders that FFmate automatically replaces with actual values during processing.

Wildcards offer a flexible and efficient way to automate naming patterns, making it easy to organize outputs based on things like input file names, file extension, timestamps, and more.


For example, you can include the **date, time, input file name, or a UUID** in your output file names. This helps keep your files and folders **organized, consistent, and easy to track**, without extra effort.

## Input & Output File Information

### Full File Path:

These wildcards return the **complete file path**, including the directory, filename, and extension.

| Wildcard         | Description                          | Example Output          |
|-----------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------|
| `${INPUT_FILE}`  | Full path of the input file      | `/source/input.mp4`     |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE}` | Full path of the output file     | `/destination/output.mp4`    |

#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/input.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/output.mp4"
     }'
```

### Filename Information:

These wildcards return the **filename** from the full path, either with or without the extension.

| Wildcard               | Description                                         | Example Output    |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| `${INPUT_FILE_BASE}`   | Filename with extension (without the path)         | `input.mp4`      |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE_BASE}`  | Filename with extension (without the path)         | `output.mp4`     |
| `${INPUT_FILE_BASENAME}` | Filename without extension                        | `input`          |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE_BASENAME}` | Filename without extension                        | `output`         |


#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}.mkv",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/videos/original_movie.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/converted/${INPUT_FILE_BASENAME}"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/converted/input.mkv
```

---

### File Extensions and Directory Path:

These wildcards return **the file extension** and the **directory path**.

| Wildcard                  | Description                               | Example Output    |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| `${INPUT_FILE_EXTENSION}` | File extension of the input file         | `.mp4`           |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE_EXTENSION}` | File extension of the output file        | `.mp4`           |
| `${INPUT_FILE_DIR}`       | Directory path of the input file         | `/source`        |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE_DIR}`      | Directory path of the output file        | `/destination`        |

#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/${INPUT_FILE_BASENAME}_converted${INPUT_FILE_EXTENSION}"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/destination/input_converted.mp4
```

## Date & Time Wildcards

These wildcards insert **dynamic timestamps** into your output paths, making it easy to organize processed files based on date and time.

| Wildcard                   | Description                                | Example Output   |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|------------------|
| `${DATE_YEAR}`             | Full year (4 digits)                      | `2024`           |
| `${DATE_SHORTYEAR}`        | Short year (last 2 digits)                | `24`             |
| `${DATE_MONTH}`            | Month number (01-12)                      | `01`             |
| `${DATE_DAY}`              | Day of the month (01-31)                   | `15`             |
| `${DATE_WEEK}`             | ISO week number (01-52)                   | `03`             |
| `${TIME_HOUR}`             | Hour (24-hour format, 00-23)              | `14`             |
| `${TIME_MINUTE}`           | Minute (00-59)                            | `05`             |
| `${TIME_SECOND}`           | Second (00-59)                            | `32`             |

#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/${DATE_YEAR}/${DATE_MONTH}/${DATE_DAY}/video_${TIME_HOUR}-${TIME_MINUTE}-${TIME_SECOND}.mp4",
       "priority": 2
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate//destination/2024/02/15/video_14-30-45.mp4
```

## Timestamps

These wildcards generate **precise timestamps** to create unique file and directory names based on the **current time**.

| Wildcard                      | Description                                | Example Output          |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| `${TIMESTAMP_SECONDS}`        | Unix timestamp in seconds                 | `1705318712`           |
| `${TIMESTAMP_MILLISECONDS}`   | Unix timestamp with milliseconds precision | `1705318712123`         |
| `${TIMESTAMP_MICROSECONDS}`   | Unix timestamp with microseconds precision | `1705318712123456`      |
| `${TIMESTAMP_NANOSECONDS}`    | Unix timestamp with nanoseconds precision  | `1705318712123456789`   |


#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/video_${TIMESTAMP_SECONDS}.mp4"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/destination/video_1705318712.mp4
```

## System Information

These wildcards return **system information**, specifically the **operating system name** and **CPU architecture**.

| Wildcard       | Description                        | Example Output  |
|---------------|------------------------------------|----------------|
| `${OS_NAME}`  | Operating system name             | `linux`        |
| `${OS_ARCH}`  | CPU architecture                  | `amd64`        |

#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/processed/${OS_NAME}/${OS_ARCH}/video.mp4"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/processed/linux/amd64/video.mp4
```

## Unique Identifier

This wildcard generate **random unique identifiers**.

| Wildcard       | Description                        | Example Output                                  |
|---------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| `${UUID}`     | Randomly generated UUID (v4)      | `550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000`        |


#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/processed/${UUID}_video.mp4"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/processed/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000_video.mp4
```

## Task Source

This wildcard returns the **origin of the task**, indicating whether it was created through the `API` or triggered automatically by a `watchfolder`.  
It’s especially useful in pre-processing scripts, where different logic may be applied based on how the task was initiated.

| Wildcard    | Description                                                | Example Output        |
|-------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|
| `${SOURCE}` | Returns the source that triggered the task (e.g. API or watchfolder) | `api`, `watchfolder`  |

---

### Example

Use `${SOURCE}` in a Bash script to apply different behavior depending on the task’s origin.

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

# Pre-processing script example
# Adjusts logic based on the source of the task

case "$SOURCE" in
  api)
    echo "Task originated from API. Applying API-specific logic."
    # Add API-specific pre-processing commands here
    ;;
  watchfolder)
    echo "Task originated from Watchfolder. Applying Watchfolder-specific logic."
    # Add Watchfolder-specific pre-processing commands here
    ;;
  *)
    echo "Unknown task source. Applying default logic."
    # Add fallback logic here
    ;;
esac
```

Commit message:

update: add new section for FFmpeg Path wildcard

docs/wildcards.md, after:

---
title: Wildcards in FFmate – Dynamic File Naming and Task Scripting
description: Learn how to use wildcards in FFmate to generate dynamic file and folder names, automate output paths, insert timestamps, and adapt processing logic based on task sources like the API or watchfolders
---


# Wildcards

FFmate supports wildcards to help you generate file and directory names dynamically—no manual renaming required.  
Instead of hardcoding output paths for each task, you can use smart placeholders that FFmate automatically replaces with actual values during processing.

Wildcards offer a flexible and efficient way to automate naming patterns, making it easy to organize outputs based on things like input file names, file extension, timestamps, and more.


For example, you can include the **date, time, input file name, or a UUID** in your output file names. This helps keep your files and folders **organized, consistent, and easy to track**, without extra effort.

## Input & Output File Information

### Full File Path:

These wildcards return the **complete file path**, including the directory, filename, and extension.

| Wildcard         | Description                          | Example Output          |
|-----------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------|
| `${INPUT_FILE}`  | Full path of the input file      | `/source/input.mp4`     |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE}` | Full path of the output file     | `/destination/output.mp4`    |

#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/input.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/output.mp4"
     }'
```

### Filename Information:

These wildcards return the **filename** from the full path, either with or without the extension.

| Wildcard               | Description                                         | Example Output    |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| `${INPUT_FILE_BASE}`   | Filename with extension (without the path)         | `input.mp4`      |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE_BASE}`  | Filename with extension (without the path)         | `output.mp4`     |
| `${INPUT_FILE_BASENAME}` | Filename without extension                        | `input`          |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE_BASENAME}` | Filename without extension                        | `output`         |


#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}.mkv",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/videos/original_movie.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/converted/${INPUT_FILE_BASENAME}"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/converted/input.mkv
```

---

### File Extensions and Directory Path:

These wildcards return **the file extension** and the **directory path**.

| Wildcard                  | Description                               | Example Output    |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| `${INPUT_FILE_EXTENSION}` | File extension of the input file         | `.mp4`           |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE_EXTENSION}` | File extension of the output file        | `.mp4`           |
| `${INPUT_FILE_DIR}`       | Directory path of the input file         | `/source`        |
| `${OUTPUT_FILE_DIR}`      | Directory path of the output file        | `/destination`        |

#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/${INPUT_FILE_BASENAME}_converted${INPUT_FILE_EXTENSION}"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/destination/input_converted.mp4
```

## Date & Time Wildcards

These wildcards insert **dynamic timestamps** into your output paths, making it easy to organize processed files based on date and time.

| Wildcard                   | Description                                | Example Output   |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|------------------|
| `${DATE_YEAR}`             | Full year (4 digits)                      | `2024`           |
| `${DATE_SHORTYEAR}`        | Short year (last 2 digits)                | `24`             |
| `${DATE_MONTH}`            | Month number (01-12)                      | `01`             |
| `${DATE_DAY}`              | Day of the month (01-31)                   | `15`             |
| `${DATE_WEEK}`             | ISO week number (01-52)                   | `03`             |
| `${TIME_HOUR}`             | Hour (24-hour format, 00-23)              | `14`             |
| `${TIME_MINUTE}`           | Minute (00-59)                            | `05`             |
| `${TIME_SECOND}`           | Second (00-59)                            | `32`             |

#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/${DATE_YEAR}/${DATE_MONTH}/${DATE_DAY}/video_${TIME_HOUR}-${TIME_MINUTE}-${TIME_SECOND}.mp4",
       "priority": 2
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate//destination/2024/02/15/video_14-30-45.mp4
```

## Timestamps

These wildcards generate **precise timestamps** to create unique file and directory names based on the **current time**.

| Wildcard                      | Description                                | Example Output          |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| `${TIMESTAMP_SECONDS}`        | Unix timestamp in seconds                 | `1705318712`           |
| `${TIMESTAMP_MILLISECONDS}`   | Unix timestamp with milliseconds precision | `1705318712123`         |
| `${TIMESTAMP_MICROSECONDS}`   | Unix timestamp with microseconds precision | `1705318712123456`      |
| `${TIMESTAMP_NANOSECONDS}`    | Unix timestamp with nanoseconds precision  | `1705318712123456789`   |


#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/video_${TIMESTAMP_SECONDS}.mp4"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/destination/video_1705318712.mp4
```

## System Information

These wildcards return **system information**, specifically the **operating system name** and **CPU architecture**.

| Wildcard       | Description                        | Example Output  |
|---------------|------------------------------------|----------------|
| `${OS_NAME}`  | Operating system name             | `linux`        |
| `${OS_ARCH}`  | CPU architecture                  | `amd64`        |

#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/processed/${OS_NAME}/${OS_ARCH}/video.mp4"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/processed/linux/amd64/video.mp4
```

## FFmpeg Path

This wildcard provides the full, resolved path to the `FFmpeg` executable as configured in FFmate (see [command-line flags](/docs/flags.md#server-command-flags)). It is particularly useful for advanced workflows that require multiple `ffmpeg` calls within a single command, such as **two-pass encoding**.

This allows you to reference the specific `FFmpeg` binary that FFmate is configured to use, which may be different from the one in your system's default `PATH`.

| Wildcard    | Description                                  | Example Output      |
|-------------|----------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| `${FFMPEG}` | Returns the full path to the FFmpeg executable | `/usr/bin/ffmpeg`   |

#### Example: Two-Pass VP9 Encoding

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libvpx-vp9 -b:v 2M -pass 1 -an -f null - && ${FFMPEG} -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libvpx-vp9 -b:v 2M -pass 2 -c:a libopus ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/destination/video.webm"
     }'
```
This command performs a two-pass VP9 encode. FFmate automatically prepends the configured `ffmpeg` path to the beginning of the `command` string for the first pass. When chaining commands with `&&`, you must explicitly use the `${FFMPEG}` wildcard for any subsequent `ffmpeg` calls to ensure the correct executable is used in each chained command.

## Unique Identifier

This wildcard generate **random unique identifiers**.

| Wildcard       | Description                        | Example Output                                  |
|---------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| `${UUID}`     | Randomly generated UUID (v4)      | `550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000`        |


#### Example:

```sh
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/api/v1/tasks \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{
       "command": "-y -i ${INPUT_FILE} -c:v libx264 -preset fast -crf 23 ${OUTPUT_FILE}",
       "inputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/source/video.mp4",
       "outputFile": "/volumes/ffmate/processed/${UUID}_video.mp4"
     }'
```

#### Output Path:

```sh
/volumes/ffmate/processed/550e8400-e29b-41d4-a716-446655440000_video.mp4
```

## Task Source

This wildcard returns the **origin of the task**, indicating whether it was created through the `API` or triggered automatically by a `watchfolder`.  
It’s especially useful in pre-processing scripts, where different logic may be applied based on how the task was initiated.

| Wildcard    | Description                                                | Example Output        |
|-------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|
| `${SOURCE}` | Returns the source that triggered the task (e.g. API or watchfolder) | `api`, `watchfolder`  |

---

### Example

Use `${SOURCE}` in a Bash script to apply different behavior depending on the task’s origin.

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

# Pre-processing script example
# Adjusts logic based on the source of the task

case "$SOURCE" in
  api)
    echo "Task originated from API. Applying API-specific logic."
    # Add API-specific pre-processing commands here
    ;;
  watchfolder)
    echo "Task originated from Watchfolder. Applying Watchfolder-specific logic."
    # Add Watchfolder-specific pre-processing commands here
    ;;
  *)
    echo "Unknown task source. Applying default logic."
    # Add fallback logic here
    ;;
esac
```
